AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BOARD
FINAL AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT REPORT FOR A TANARG
NEO MICROLIGHT, 9J – YVT THAT OCCURRED IN
LIVINGSTONE, ZAMBIA ON 10th JANUARY, 2020.

Kenneth Kaunda International
Airport
P.O. Box 310140
Lusaka, Zambia.
Mobile: +260 971232741
Tel: +260212892357

INTRODUCTION
On Friday 10th January, 2020, an accident involving a Microlight operated by Batoka
Sky Limited was reported to the Director General, Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) who
immediately relayed the information to the Aircraft Accident investigation Board
(AAIB). The aircraft involved was a Tanarg Neo Microlight, National Registration Marks
9J-YVT, Manufacturer’s Serial Number T19028. It was reported to have crash landed
away from Maramba Aerodrome.
The interim Director Aircraft Accident Investigation Board immediately constituted an
investigation team made of 2 staff pertaining to the domains of operations and
airworthiness to travel to the accident scene.
SYNOPSIS
On Friday January 10, 2020, a Tanarg Neo Microlight operated by Batoka Sky Limited
departed from Maramba aerodrome with the intention of conducting a performance
check flight below the special rules area (SRA). At about 05:42 Hours UTC the Pilot
tried to make an emergency landing on the road leading to Baobab Ridge helipad with
the Microlight in a simulated engine failure mode. However, during the process of
emergency landing, the Microlight right hand main landing gear hooked up in the 11kV
ZESCO powerline causing the microlight to lose control and crash about 15 meters
from the power lines. One Crew member on board died on impact while the other
survived. The microlight sustained substantial damage. No post-crash fire broke out.
The investigation team concluded that the cause of the accident was due to executing
of simulated emergency landing in hazardous conditions. Further, other possible
contributory and latent factors were identified.

1

1. FACTUAL INFORMATION
1.1 History of Flight
The Microlight took off from Batoka Sky airfield for a performance check in emergency
situations with two (2) Batoka Sky limited staff [Pilot in command (P1) and observer
pilot (P2)]. Weather observed at Harry Mwaanga Nkumbula International Airport at the
time of the accident was as follows:
METAR FLHN 100700Z VRBO1KT
CAVOK 23/21, Q1016 AT 0600Z, QFE WAS 902.9 and QNH 1016
Batoka Sky’s Tanarg Neo Air Creation Trike (Microlight), Registration number 9J-YVT,
and Manufacturer’s Serial Number T19028 was on a line Check flight as well as
Performance check in Emergency Situations. Having completed the line checks
around the Batoka Sky Airfield, the Microlight headed for the performance check in
emergency situations away from the airfiled. During an attempt to perform a simulated
emergency landing off road, a decision was made to overshoot due to sudden sighting
of 11 kV ZESCO cables crossing in close proximity.
The Microlight rear right wheel ended up hooking in the power lines (Fig.2, Fig 4.2)
pitching the aircraft forward and simultaneously swinging the nose end to the right,
initiating an uncontrolled spin. It crashed into the bushes 15 meters ahead of the Power
lines on the left-hand side of the gravel road leading to Baobab Ridge Helipad (Fig 6.1
– Fig. 6.4).
Maintenance log books state that no anomalies were found in the pre-flight check done
by the Pilots and the technical crew at Batoka Sky Airfield. There was no flight plan
filed to Harry Mwaanga Nkumbula International Airport Office.
TABLE 1: Factual Information
Flight Rules

Visual Flight Rules (VFR)

Departure Aerodrome

Maramba Aerodrome (Batoka Sky Airfield)

Estimated

Off

Block 05:15 UTC

Time
Cruising Speed

60 Knots

Cruising Altitude

4500FT

Route Of Flight

Batoka Sky Airfield-Victoria Falls-Batoka Sky Airfield

Destination Aerodrome

Circuit Flight terminating at Batoka Sky Airfield

Endurance

2 Hours

Persons On Board

2

2

The progress of the flight up to the accident after take-off from Batoka Sky Airfield was
stated by the Pilot (P2) as follows;
“The Pilot and myself set out to Complete his 6 monthly Line Check and at the same
time review the Air Creation Tanarg Neo performance in Emergency Situations.
It was discussed, beforehand, the decreased performance of the Air Creation Trike
compared to the Delta Tryke Aviation (DTA) Microlight. So, our goal was to determine
the Emergency Handling Characteristics of the Aircraft in Simulated Conditions.
After the line check was completed around Batoka Sky Airfield, the Pilot and I set out
to do Emergencies off field. We discussed the main road as the Emergency Landing
Zone after take-off when a return to FLMR (Maramba Airfield) is not possible. At first,
we made a practise approach to the main road and commenced go-around when it
was deemed possible to safely land on the main road that leads towards the Avani /
Royal Livingstone Hotels. All the time my job at the back was to take mental notes of
the Microlight’s decent rate from the back seat and record its glide speeds and
characteristics, so as to compare the characteristics with the other microlight. The
pilot’s responsibility as Front Pilot was to control the Microlight as the Tanarg Neo
Microlight has no Dual Controls.
It was at that point that a question was raised in conditions not favourable to land on
the road, such as too much traffic, wind direction and speeds. It was selected by the
pilot and myself that the Dirt road leading from the main road towards United Air
Charter (UAC) might be an option at last resort. The obstacles on the ground such as
the Baobab tree and Electric Poles on the overshoot and shallow trees on the
undershoot were noted. The initial touch down point on the road was also discussed.
This was acknowledged by the Pilot in the front. We climbed back out towards
Maramba.
We then returned to the height of around 400-500ft Above Ground Level (AGL) and
positioned above Maramba River. At this point it was determined to be unable to safely
return to FLM