Aviation Short Investigation
Final Report
Occurrence involving
Piper Aztec PA-23-250, N14178
Lower Bogue, Eleuthera, Bahamas
21st March 2020
AAIA Aviation Occurrence Investigation
AO-20-000015
Date of Final Report
10th May, 2021

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

Publishing information
Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority
2nd Floor, Manx Corporate Center
#45 West Bay Street
P. O. Box CB-11702
Nassau N. P., Bahamas
Tel: 1 (242) 397-5520 or (242) 397-5509
Fax: (242) 327-2192
Email: baaid@bahamas.gov.bs
Website: http://www.baaid.org

Ownership of intellectual property rights in this publication
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights, if any) in this publication is
owned by the Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, P. O. Box
CB-11702, Manx Corporate enter, #45 West Bay Street, Nassau, N. P., Bahamas.

N14178 Final Report

2Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

About the AAIA
The Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority (AAIA)
The Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority (AAIA) is the independent accident investigation agency
under the Bahamas Ministry of Transport & Local Government (MOT&LG) charged with the
responsibility of investigating all aviation accidents and incidents in the Bahamas.
The AAIA’s function is to promote and improve safety and public confidence in the aviation industry
through excellence in:
• Independent investigation of aviation accidents and other safety occurrences
• Safety data recording, analysis and research
• Fostering safety awareness, knowledge and action.
The AAIA does not investigate for the purpose of apportioning blame or to provide a means for
determining liability. At the same time, an investigation report must include factual material of sufficient
weight to support the analysis and findings. At all times the AAIA endeavors to balance the use of
material that could imply adverse comment with the need to properly explain what happened, and why, in
a fair and unbiased manner.
The AAIA performs its functions in accordance with the provisions of the Aircraft Accident Investigation
Authority Act 2019 and Regulations, 2021 and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
Annex 13 and, where applicable, relevant international agreements.
The AAIA is mandated to investigate air transportation accidents and incidents, determine probable
cause(s) of such accidents and incidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues
and evaluate the safety effectiveness of agencies and stakeholders involved in air transportation. The
objective of a safety investigation is to identify and reduce safety-related risk. AAIA investigations
determine and communicate the safety factors related to the transport safety matter being investigated.
The AAIA makes public its findings and recommendations through accident reports, safety studies,
special investigation reports, safety recommendations and safety alerts. Unless otherwise indicated,
recommendations in this report are addressed to the regulatory authorities of the State having
responsibility for the matters with which the recommendation is concerned. It is for those authorities to
decide what action is taken. When the AAIA issues a safety recommendation, the person, organization or
agency is required to provide a written response without delay. The response shall indicate whether the
person, organization or agency accepts the recommendation, any reasons for not accepting part or all of
the recommendation(s), and details of any proposed safety action(s) resulting from the recommendation(s)
issued.

N14178 Final Report

3Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority
Title
Registered Owner:

Strong Tower Services LLC

Manufacturer:

Piper Aircraft

Aircraft Type:

PA-23-250

Nationality:

United States of America

Registration:

N14178

Place of Accident:

Lower Bogue, Eleuthera, Bahamas

Date and Time:

21st March 2020, 1:50 PM

Synopsis
Notification:

BCAA, NTSB, FAA

Investigating Authority:

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority,
Ministry of Transport & Local Government

Investigator in Charge:

Mr. Kendall Dorsett Jr.

Accredited
Representatives:

Mr. Brian Rayner (NTSB) USA

Technical Advisors:

Mr. Ryan Enders (Lycoming)
Mr. Roberto Rodriguez (FAA)
Mr. Marquin Israel (FAA)
Mr. Michel Fischetti (FAA)

Releasing Authority: Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority
Date of Final
Report Publication:

N14178 Final Report

10th May 2021

4Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

What Happened?
On the 21st March 2020, at approximately 1:50 PM, a Piper Aztec (PA-23-250) aircraft, United States
registration N14178 ditched in shallow waters near a beach at Lower Bogue, Eleuthera, Bahamas.
The private flight departed the North Eleuthera International Airport (MYEH), Eleuthera, Bahamas with
destination New Bight Airport (MYCB), Cat Island, Bahamas with the pilot and two (2) passengers on
board. The flight operated under Visual Flight Rules (VFR).
The pilot reported that shortly after departing MYEH and while climbing through an altitude of 1,200 ft.,
his attention was drawn to the fuel flow indicator in the aircraft after “the left engine started running a lil
rough.” The left engine roughness was followed by the sound of a ‘bang’ and a subsequent “much louder
bang” followed by flames which were observed coming from the inboard left engine cowling closest to
the pilot.
During the post-accident interview, the pilot stated that he secured the left engine by shutting off power
and fuel supply and attempted to join the right downwind pattern for runway 07 at MYEH. The pilot
further stated that with the change in direction toward the airport, the fire became more intense and
realizing he would be unable to return to the field, he sought a beach closest to his position where he
could land the aircraft safely. Once a beach was located, the pilot executed a landing in the shallow waters
approximately 250 ft. from the shoreline in the Lower Bogue, Eleuthera settlement.

Fig. 1: Drone imagery of accident site location from MYEH aerodrome

After successfully ditching the aircraft, the pilot and both passengers were able to exit the aircraft in
waters approximately waist deep and proceeded to the shore where they received assistance from local
police and concerned citizens. The ditching of the aircraft occurred approximately 2 nautical miles from
the threshold of Runway 07 at MYEH.
N14178 Final Report

5Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority
The aircraft sustained substantial damages as a result of the engine fire and impact forces sustained during
the ditching in waters.
On 22nd March 2020, a team of investigators were dispatched to the scene. Initial assessments uncovered a
catastrophic cylinder failure on the left engine which may have been the initial cause of the engine fire.
Other damages documented include:
•
The left engine (severely damaged due to the fire)
•
Both wings and
•
The underside of the fuselage
•
Post-crash damages of note includes, damages as a result of submersion in salt
water The occupants of the aircraft received no injuries.
At the time of the accident, the weather was reported as visual meteorological conditions (VMC).
Weather was not a factor in the accident.

Photo 1: N14178 at accident site

N14178 Final Report

6Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

Analysis
Following recovery of the aircraft, initial investigation showed a failure of the connecting rod assembly.
The engine as well as its components were further analyzed. The engine was sent to Certified Engines
Unlimited Inc., for analysis. Subsequently other components including the connecting rod, along with the
connecting rod bearings, connecting rod bushing, connecting rod nuts and bolts, and piston pin, were sent
to the Lycoming Materials Lab for investigation. All parts returned were seriously corroded due to
submersion in salt water.
Due to the state of emergency that existed in the Bahamas during the time of arrangement for further
analysis of the engine, the engine was delayed in transportation to the United States for further analysis.
Additionally, analysis at the manufacturer could not commence as anticipated, also due to restrictions in
manpower and social distancing protocols, again, due to the state of emergency that existed in the United
States. As the engine was previously submerged in salt water, some component damages resulted.

Engine Analysis
On 29th June 2020, an analysis of the left engine was conducted at the facility of Certified Engines
Unlimited Inc., Pembroke Pines, Florida, USA. The AAIA was represented at the analysis by inspectors
from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), who oversaw the examination process.
The engine was unboxed and the following were documented:
• Initial visual external inspection revealed #3 cylinder assembly had experienced a catastrophic
failure (specifically, the engine block attaching hardware had failed).
• During the detailed inspection, the following occurred and was noted:
o #3 cylinder was removed completely from the engine.
o The accessory case and attached accessories were removed from the engine. No items
of significance were noted.
o The oil pan exhibited signs of heat stress and burn through from fire.
o The oil pan/intake plenum was removed and its contents examined. Found in the oil pan
was the connecting rod for #3 engine which had separated from the crankshaft.
o The #3 cylinder valves were removed and the keepers, springs and valves were all
examined under magnification with no significant findings or observations.
o The #3 piston and its component parts were examined.
The connecting rod bearing cap bolts were inspected and it was noted that of the two
bolts used to attach the connecting rod bearing cap; one bolt experienced structural
failure while the other bolt and nut appeared to be intact with the threads having slight
distortion.
Additional components of the left engine were sent to the Materials Laboratory at Lycoming (the
manufacturer) in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, USA for additional examination:

Component Analysis
The following components of the left engine were sent to the Materials Laboratory at Lycoming (the
manufacturer) in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, USA for additional examination:
• connecting rod,
• connecting rod bearings,
• connecting rod upper bushing,
• connecting rod bolts,
• connecting rod bolt nuts, and
N14178 Final Report

7Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority
•

the piston pin assembly.

The component analysis concluded:
• Of the parts returned, only the connecting rod was possibly manufactured by Lycoming. The
bearings, bushing, conn rod bolts, conn rod nuts, and piston pin were all manufactured by another
manufacturer.
• The most recent overhaul was performed in the field by Certified Engines Unlimited, Inc., not by
Lycoming Engines.
• The connecting rod fractured in the bushing bore region. The hardness of the connecting rod was
measured as 23.4 and 24.3 HRC on two mounted samples.
• The microstructure of the connecting rod is a martensite-ferrite-carbide aggregate. The fracture
surfaces were too badly damaged to identify the failure mode.
• The deformation and corresponding fracture surfaces of the fractured connecting rod bolt
indicated the bolt failed in bending, with sudden overload conditions. No signs of fatigue were
visible on either fracture surface of the failed bolt.
• The AEL-13923 bushing is made of a bronze alloy that does not conform to the Lycoming
bushing design.

Connecting Rod Bolts:
Part Markings: SL 74644D / FAA-PMA
•

•

The two connecting rod bolts are marked with identical part markings indicating they were
manufactured by Superior. One connecting rod bolt fractured through the reduced diameter
section closer to the threads, with the top region including the head remaining lodged in the
connecting rod cap, while the bottom region was recovered with the nut still on. The
corresponding fracture surfaces of the bolt were extremely corroded and cleaned in a Liquinox
detergent solution using the ultrasonic cleaner. No signs of fatigue were identifiable on either
fracture surface (Figure 9). The shear lips on the fracture surfaces and deformation of the two bolt
portions indicate the bolt was loaded in bending (Figure 10). Examining the fracture surface using
the SEM reveals ductile dimples and the absence of any identifiable fatigue features, indicating
the bolt likely failed due to sudden overload (Figure 11).
The other connecting rod bolt was intact, but slightly bent (Figure 12). This connecting rod bolt
and one connecting rod bolt nut were found inside the engine cowling. This bolt and nut were
found completely disconnected from one another, and from the connecting rod assembly. There
was damage on the opposite side of the intact bolt, consistent with the bolt rocking back and forth
within the connecting rod; the orientation of this damage is also consistent with the bolt being
loaded in bending (Figure 13). While the threads of the intact bolt were not stripped, damage, in
the form of nicked and smashed thread crests, was visible on the three or four threads furthest
from the head (Figure 14). White globular particles were visible in the thread roots (Figure 15).

Connecting Rod Bolt Nuts

Part Markings: None (per Logbook: SL12186)
•

Per the logbook, both the connecting rod bolt nuts are manufactured by Superior (Figure 16). One
of the nuts remained on the end of the fractured bolt. The other intact connecting rod bolt nut was
found in the engine cowling, along with, but separate from, the intact connecting rod bolt. While
the thread closest to the bearing surface on the nut appeared slightly damaged, the remainder of
the threads appeared intact (Figures 17 and 18). The threads on both nuts were not stripped; white
globular particles were visible in the thread roots. The nuts displayed minor secondary damage
and corrosion.

N14178 Final Report

8Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority
•

The connecting rod bolt and connecting rod nut referred to as intact in this report were found
inside the engine cowling, separate from one another and separate from the connecting rod
assembly. The threads of both the nut and the bolt displayed minor damage but were not stripped.

N14178 Final Report

9Page

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

N14178 Final Report

10 P a g e

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

N14178 Final Report

11 P a g e

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

N14178 Final Report

12 P a g e

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

N14178 Final Report

13 P a g e

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

Investigation Findings
Pilot
The pilot-in-command of the aircraft was a 54 year old male who was issued an Airline Transport Pilot
certificate by the United States Federal Aviation Administration on 25 th March, 2013. He also held a type
rating for the Beechcraft BE-1900 with the limitation, ‘Second in command required’.

The Aircraft
Piper Aztec N14178 was a fixed-wing, six seat, twin-engine, normally aspirated engine. It had retractable
landing gears, was an all metal airplane and was designed to combine multi-engine power, performance,
and safety with smooth, easy handling characteristics and operational adaptability. N14178 was registered
in the United States of America by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to Strong Tower Services
LLC.

Aircraft Maintenance (Left Engine)
The logbook for left engine S/N 27-4743 was provided; according to the logbook, the engine was field
overhauled by Certified Engines Unlimited, Inc. on November 5, 2018. The engine had 2,917.30 total
hours on it at overhaul. At overhaul, Bendix magnetos, rebuilt by Continental, were installed, along with
a reground camshaft from Aircraft Specialties and six new Continental Titan cylinder assemblies. The
logbook entry lists parts replaced during the overhaul; most of the parts listed are not Lycoming parts.
Thus, following the overhaul, the engine was comprised of various parts manufactured by Lycoming,
Continental and Superior. Of the engine components returned to the materials lab, only the connecting rod
itself is possibly manufactured by Lycoming.
On April 1, 2019 at Hobbs time 725.7 hours, the left engine was installed and inspected in accordance
with an annual inspection and was determined to be in airworthy condition.
On May 7, 2019 the oil from the left engine was drained, oil filter replaced and serviced with Aero Shell
100 mineral oil. Oil Filter was examined and found clean. On August 29, 2019 at Hobbs time 778.9 hours,
the oil from the left engine was again drained, oil filter replaced and engine serviced with Aero Shell
100W plus engine oil.
The final engine service prior to the accident was conducted on February 27, 2020 where times noted
were Hobbs – 890.9 hours and total time since major overhaul documented at 165.2 hours.
At the time of the accident the Hobbs meter indicated times as 914.2 hours showing a difference of 23.3
hours since last maintenance inspection.

N14178 Final Report

14 P a g e

Aircraft Accident Investigation Authority

Probable Cause
The AAIA has determined the probable cause of the accident as a catastrophic failure of the #3 cylinder of
the left engine which severed the fuel line and resulted in an inflight fire that led to the ditching of the
aircraft.
Contributing factors which resulted in the failure of the cylinder;
 Examination of the broken connecting rod bolt fractured surface revealed, ductile dimples and the
absence of any identifiable fatigue features, indicating the bolt likely failed due to sudden
overload, as a result of the intact connecting rod bolt rocking back and forth within the connecting
rod.

N14178 Final Report

15 P a g e

