CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
Aircraft Accident Investigation and Inquiry Board
Aircraft Accident Report
BASIC INFORMATION
Aircraft Registration No.
Aircraft Type/Model
Owner/ Operator
Address of Operator
Date/Time of Accident
Type of Operation
Phase of Operation
Type of Accident
Place of Accident

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

RP-C1124
Cessna 150
Delta Air Aviation School Inc.
Plaridel General Aviation Area, Plaridel
September 25, 2008/ approximately 8:30 am
Flight Training (Re-Solo)
Landing
Landing flare/touchdown
Plaridel, Airport Rwy 17 Plaridel, Bulacan

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On September 25, 2008, Ms. Goldi Raj, utilizing RP-C 1124 a Cessna 150 type of aircraft
was released for a re-solo flight. Her first landing attempt was met by a go-around due to an
aircraft still exiting the active runway 17. Another landing was attempted and about 8:30 am
while executing a landing flare on runway 17 the aircraft crashed at touchdown at about 600
meters from threshold of runway 17. The aircraft right wingtip first impacted the runway; it
left a debris path of approximately 15 meters, and came to rest after the number 3 runway
exit. The debris path was on the left of the runway centerline, and progressed towards runway
17.
From the oral account of Capt. Lowell Romero Jr, flight instructor of the subject aircraft. who
witnessed the crash, from Delta base, he claimed that the approach was not good on finals
and it was correcting alignment with the runway centerline.
The airplane bounced three times with each bounce harder than the previous bounce. After
the third bounce the airplane landed nose gear first, with the propeller already struck the
runway, and the nose gear collapsed and left main landing gear was detached, it settled on a
heading of 300 degrees. There was substantial damage to the aircraft and its engine.
PROBABLE CAUSE
The pilot-in-command’s failure to maintain aircraft control contributed to the crash, and also
an improper flare during landing resulted to a porpoise induced oscillation of the aircraft.

Investigation Report RP-C1124

Page 1 of 2

SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of this investigation, the Aircraft Accident Investigation and Inquiry Board made
the following safety recommendations:
 It would appear from the observation of the witnesses that the flight instructor failed
to make the decision to advice his student on her flight situation, instead of continuing
with the approach and tried to correct the misalignment with the runway.
 It is recommended that the evaluation of the quality of instructors of Delta Air
Aviation Inc. should be made as soon as possible to preclude another untoward
accident of this nature.
 That medical release should be issued to the pilot-in-command before any other flight.

Investigation Report RP-C1124

Page 2 of 2

