CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
Aircraft Accident Investigation and Inquiry Board
Aircraft Accident Report
BASIC INFORMATION
Aircraft Registration No.
Make/Model
Owner and Operator
Address of Operator

:
:
:
:

Date/Time of Accident
Place of Accident
Type of Operation
Phase of Operation
Type of Accident

:
:
:
:
:

RP-C1950
BE-C50 Twin Bonanza
Aviation Technology Innovators, Inc
Delta Gate, Manila Domestic Airport,
Pasay City
April 25, 2008 at around 1310H
Roxas Palawan
General Aviation
Missed approach
Go around/Missed approached after LH engine
failure

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
At around 1310H of April 25, 2008, RP-C1950, a BE-C50 Twin Bonanza type of aircraft
piloted by Capt. Jose E. Yapparcon took off Manila Domestic Airport bound for Roxas,
Palawan. This was his second flight for the day. While flying en-route, everything was
normal. At about 10 nautical miles to Roxas, Palawan, according to pilot, he noticed that his
LH engine oil pressure drops to 30 PSI. This situation alerted him to closely monitor the left
engine parameters. At approximately 6 miles to Roxas Airport while descending to traffic
altitude, the LH engine RPM indicator drops and the aircraft yawed to the left. He continue
the approach with RH engine operating after securing the LH engine. He continue the
approach and fly over the airport before joining right downwind for Runway 03. After
turning final and made sure of the runway, he extended his landing gears and flaps. The
aircraft touch down at about half of the runway. Thinking that he will not be able to stop the
aircraft and probably hit the aircraft park at the right end of the runway, the pilot decided to
make a go around with one engine operating. The aircraft was able to climb but due to heavy
rain coming and gusty wind the aircraft lost speed and altitude and subsequently hit bamboo
trees. The aircraft landed in the grassy area with gears retracted, approximately 250 meters
away from the end of the runway.

Investigation Report RP-C1950

Page 1 of 2

PROBABLE CAUSE
 Inadequate supply of oil to the main journal bearing caused by clogged up oil screen
giving low oil pressure indication in the cockpit prompting pilot to initiate engine
shut down while on flight.
 The decision of the PIC to go around after touchdown, despite the odds against him
(one engine out, poor visibility and the presence of obstacles at upwind) was
probably a major factor.
 The pilot might have established a high approach (above the glide path) during the
final approach which causes the aircraft to touch down at the middle of the runway
or the approach speed is high that causes the aircraft to float after the extension of
flaps.
 Low visibility during the approach which causes the pilot to miss the threshold.
SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS
 After disassembly and inspection of LH engine, it was established that the cause of
low pressure indication was clogged up oil screen. It is recommended that owners and
operators using AVCO Lycoming GO-480 series engine should accomplish oil screen
inspection every 25 hours in addition to oil screen inspection accomplish during
engine oil change every 50 hours Periodic Inspection.
 The pilot must undergo medical examination and an ATO check ride with emphasis
on single engine operations.

Investigation Report RP-C1950

Page 2 of 2

