CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
Aircraft Accident Investigation and Inquiry Board
Aircraft Accident Report
BASIC INFORMATION
Aircraft Registration No.

:

RP-C7254

Aircraft Type/Model

:

Avions de Transport Regional ATR 72-500
(ATR 72-212A)

Owner/Operator

:

Cebu Pacific Air, Inc.

Date/Time of Accident

:

July 18, 2010 at 03:15 PM

Type of Operation

:

Scheduled Commercial Passenger Service

Phase of Operation

:

Landing

Type of Occurrence

:

Hard landing

Place of Accident

:

Runway 24, Ninoy Aquino International Airport

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
At around 1359H of July 18, 2010, RP-C7254, an ATR 72-500 (ATR 72-212A) type of
aircraft with Flight No.5J509 took off Tuguegarao Airport (RPUT) bound for Ninoy Aquino
International Airport (RPLL). The First Officer was the Pilot Flying (PF) while the Captain
was the Pilot Not Flying (PNF).
Approaching Manila, the flight was under radar vector for VOR/DME approach on runway
24. At 7 miles on finals the approach was stabilized. A sudden tailwind was experienced by
the crew at 500 feet RA which resulted to an increase in airspeed and vertical speed. The
Captain took over the controls and continued the approach. Suddenly, the visibility went to
zero and consequently the aircraft experienced a bounced landing three times, before a goaround was initiated. During climb out the crew noticed cockpit instruments were affected
including both transponders and landing gears. They requested for priority landing and they
were vectored and cleared to land at runway 13. After landing the aircraft was taxied to F4
where normal deplaning was carried out. No injuries were reported on the crew and
passengers.

Investigation Report RP-C7254

Page 1 of 2

PROBABLE CAUSE
The Aircraft Accident Investigation and Inquiry Board determined that the probable cause of
this accident was:
 Primary Cause Factor
Failure of the flight crew to discontinue the approach when deteriorating weather and
their associated hazards to flight operations had moved into the airport (Human
Factor)
 Contributory Factor
The adverse weather condition affected the judgment and decision-making of the PIC
even prior to the approach to land. With poor weather conditions being encountered,
the PIC still continued the approach and landing. (Environmental Factor)
 Underlying Factor
As a result of the bounced landing, several cockpit instruments were affected
including both transponders on board. One of the nosewheels was detached and all the
landing gears could not be retracted. Further, the integrity of the structure may have
been affected and chance airframe failure was imminent. With all of these conditions,
the Captain still opted to request for a priority landing when emergency landing was
needed.
SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of this investigation, the Aircraft Accident Investigation and Inquiry Board made
the following safety recommendation:
 CAAP-FSIS to re-examine the operator’s initial and re-current pilot training program,
putting strong emphasis on the need to instill crew awareness on the importance of
MISSED APPROACHES on adverse weather conditions.
 CAAP-FSIS to require Cebu Air Inc. to review their procedures on:
a. Go-around during bounced landing
b. Declaring priority and emergency landing.

Investigation Report RP-C7254

Page 2 of 2

